===== PAGE 1 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
1 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
Actual CAT 2024 Slot - I  
 
SECTION: VERBAL ABILITY AND READING COMPREHENSION 
 
DIRECTIONS for questions 1 to 4: The passage below is accompanied by a set of questions. Choose the 
best answer to each question. 
 
In the summer of 2022, subscribers to the US streaming service HBO MAX were alarmed to discover that 
dozens of the platform’s offerings — from the Covid-themed heist thriller Locked Down to the recent remake 
of The Witches — had been quietly 
 removed from the service . . . The news seemed like vindication to those who had long warned that streaming 
was more about controlling access to the cultural commons than expanding it, as did reports (since denied by 
the show’s creators) that Netflix had begun editing old episodes of Stranger Things to retroactively improve 
their visual effects. 
 
What's less clear is whether the commonly prescribed cure for these cultural ills — a return to the material 
pleasures of physical media — is the right one. While the makers of Blu-ray discs claim they have a shelf life 
of 100 years, such statistics remain largely theoretical until they come to pass, and are dependent on storage 
conditions, not to mention the continued availability of playback equipment. The humble DVD has already 
proved far less resilient, with many early releases already beginning to deteriorate in quality Digital movie 
purchases provide even less security. Any film “bought” on iTunes could disappear if you move to another 
territory with a different rights agreement and try to redownload it. It’s a bold new frontier in the 
commodification of art: the birth of the product recall. After a man took to Twitter to bemoan losing access to 
Cars 2 after moving from Canada to Australia, Apple clarified that users who downloaded films to their 
devices would retain permanent access to those downloads, even if they relocated to a hemisphere where the 
[content was] subject to a different set of rights agreements. Thanks to the company’s ironclad digital rights 
management technology, however, such files cannot be moved or backed up, locking you into watching with 
your Apple account. 
 
Anyone who does manage to acquire Digital Rights Management free (DRM-free) copies of their favourite 
films must nonetheless grapple with ever-changing file format standards, not to mention data decay — the 
gradual process by which electronic information slowly but surely corrupts. Only the regular migration of files 
from hard drive to hard drive can delay the inevitable, in a sisyphean battle against the ravages of digital time. 
 
In a sense, none of this is new. Charlie Chaplin burned the negative of his 1926 film A Woman of the Sea as a 
tax write-off. Many more films have been lost through accident, negligence or plain indifference. During a 
heat wave in July 1937, a Fox film vault in New Jersey burned down, destroying a majority of the silent films 
produced by the studio. 
 
Back then, at least, cinema was defined by its ephemerality: the sense that a film was as good as gone once it 
left your local cinema. Today, with film studios keen to stress the breadth of their back catalogues (or to put in 
Hollywood terms, the value of their IPs), audiences may start to wonder why those same studios seem happy 
to set the vault alight themselves if it'll help next quarter’s numbers. 
 
1. 
“Netflix had begun editing old episodes of Stranger Things to retroactively improve their visual 
effects.” What is the purpose of this example used in the passage? 
 
 
A. To show that art in the digital age, specifically film, is no longer sacrosanct, and may be changed 
to suit changing tastes or technology. 
 
B. To show that streaming services are controlling access to the cultural commons rather than 
expanding it. 
 
C. To show how unsubstantiated reports are leading to an increase in the level of distrust towards 
streaming services. 
 
D. To show a practice that justifies the fears of people who feel streaming services cannot be trusted 
to be custodians of cultural artefacts like film. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
2 
2. 
Which one of the following statements, if true, would best invalidate the main argument of the 
passage? 
 
 
A.  Improved cloud storage services have made it possible for movie collections to now be preserved 
in perpetuity, without the need to keep migrating the files. 
 
B.  When moving to a different geographical location, customers can easily use Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs) to bypass geo-blocking and regain access to their content on any streaming 
service. 
 
C.  Recent research has irrefutably proven that Blu-Ray discs have a shelf life of at least 100years. 
 
D.  Studios and streaming services have committed to giving customers 
 
3. 
Which one of the following statements about art best captures the arguments made in the passage? 
 
 
A.  In the age of online subscription services, it is time to change our understanding of classic works 
of art being primarily immutable and easily available to the public. 
 
B.  Accepting retroactive changes to works of art is dangerous because it will encourage creators to 
not put enough effort into the original attempt, given that they can always edit or update their 
work later. 
 
C.  Works of art belong to the cultural commons and hence must remain available in perpetuity, 
irrespective of who pays for access to them. 
 
D.  As art is increasingly created, stored and distributed digitally, access to it is counter intuitively 
likely to be made more difficult by the rapid churn in technology and the whims of host platforms. 
 
4. 
Which of the following statements is suggested by the sentence “Back then, at least, cinema was 
defined by its ephemerality: the sense that a film was as good as gone once it left your local cinema”? 
 
 
A.  Today, films are expected to be available for a long time, since they are no longer tied solely to 
their stay at the local cinema. 
 
B.  Cinema is now no longer as ephemeral as it used to be earlier, because the technology used for 
creating and preserving films has improved manifold. 
 
C.  Presently, there is no reason why film studios should remove access to films once they have left 
the local cinema. 
 
D.  Around a century ago, people were more accepting of not having access to films once they left the 
local cinema. 
 
DIRECTIONS for the question: There is a sentence that is missing in the paragraph below. Look at the 
paragraph and decide where (option 1, 2, 3, or 4) the following sentence would best fit. 
 
5. 
Sentence: Comprehending a wide range of emotions, Renaissance music nevertheless portrayed all 
emotions in a balanced and moderate fashion. 
 
 
Paragraph: A volume of translated Italian madrigals were published in London during the year of 
1588. This sudden public interest facilitated a surge of English Madrigal writing as well as a spurt of 
other secular music writing and publication. __(1)___. This music boom lasted for thirty years and 
was as much a golden age of music as British literature was with Shakespeare and Queen Elizabeth  
__(2)__. The rebirth in both literature and music originated in Italy and migrated to England; the 
English madrigal became more humorous and lighter in England as compared to Italy. Renaissance 
music was mostly polyphonic in texture. ___(3)___. Extreme use of and contrasts in dynamics, 
rhythm, and tone colour do not occur. __(4)__. The rhythms in Renaissance music tend to have a 
smooth, soft flow instead of a sharp, well-defined pulse of accents. 
 
 
A. Option 3 
B. Option 4 
C. Option 1 
D. Option 2 
 
 


===== PAGE 3 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
3 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
DIRECTIONS for the question: The passage given below is followed by four alternate summaries. Choose 
the option that best captures the essence of the passage. 
 
6. 
Cartographers design and create maps to communicate information about phenomena located 
somewhere on our planet. In the past, cartographers did not worry too much about who was going to 
read their maps. Although some simple “usability” research was done—like comparing whether circle 
or bar symbols worked best—cartographers knew how to make maps. This has changed now, 
however, due to all kinds of societal and technological developments. Today, map readers are more 
demanding—mostly because of the tools they use to read maps. Cartographers, who are also 
influenced by these trends, are now more interested in seeing if their products are efficient, effective, 
and appreciated. 
 
 
A.  Maps are being used for a variety of reasons and therefore map readers have become more 
demanding. 
 
B.  Today, cartographers also need to look into the usability of maps because of the new 
technological developments. 
 
C.  New technological developments have prompted cartographers to experiment with their maps by 
applying these new innovations. 
 
D.  Modern mapmakers evaluate a map’s effectiveness efficiency and satisfaction of the user through 
a series of experiments. 
 
DIRECTIONS for questions 7 to 10:  The passage below is accompanied by four questions. Based on the 
passage, choose the best answer for each question. 
 
... [T]he idea of craftsmanship is not simply nostalgic. .. . Crafts require distinct skills, an all-round approach 
to work that involves the whole product, rather than individual parts, and an attitude that necessitates devotion 
to the job and a focus on the communal interest. The concept of craft emphasises the human touch and 
individual judgment. 
 
Essentially, the crafts concept seems to run against the preponderant ethos of management studies which, as 
the academics note, have long prioritised efficiency and consistency. . . . Craft skills were portrayed as being 
primitive and traditionalist. 
 
The contrast between artisanship and efficiency first came to the fore in the 19 century when British 
manufacturers suddenly faced competition from across the Atlantic as firms developed the “American system” 
using standardised parts. . . . the worldwide success of the Singer sewing machine showed the potential of a 
mass-produced device. This process created its own reaction, first in the form of the Arts and Crafts 
movement of the late 19th century, and then again in the “small is beautiful’ movement of the 1970s. A third 
crafts movement is emerging as people become aware of the environmental impact of conventional industry. 
 
There are two potential markets for those who practise crafts. The first stems from the existence of consumers 
who are willing to pay a premium price for goods that are deemed to be of extra quality... . The second market 
lies in those consumers who wish to use their purchases to support local workers, or to reduce their 
environmental impact by taking goods to craftspeople to be mended, or recycled. 
 
For workers, the appeal of craftsmanship is that it allows them the autonomy to make creative choices, and 
thus makes a job far more satisfying. In that sense, it could offer hope for the overall labour market. Let the 
machines automate dull and repetitive tasks and let workers focus purely on their skills, judgment and 
imagination. As a current example, the academics cite the “agile” manifesto in the software sector, an industry 
at the heart of technological change. The pioneers behind the original agile manifesto promised to prioritise 
“individuals and interactions over processes and tools”. By bringing together experts from different teams, 
agile working is designed to improve creativity. 
 
But the broader question is whether crafts can create a lot more jobs than they do today. Demand for crafted 
products may rise but will it be easy to retrain workers in sectors that might get automated (such as truck 
drivers) to take advantage? In a world where products and services often have to pass through regulatory 
hoops, large companies will usually have the advantage. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
4 
History also suggests that the link between crafts and creativity is not automatic. Medieval craft guilds were 
monopolies which resisted new entrants. They were also highly hierarchical with young men required to 
spend long periods as apprentices and journeymen before they could set up on their own; by that time the 
innovative spirit may have been knocked out of them. Craft workers can thrive in the modern era, but only if 
they don’t get too organised. 
 
7. 
The author questions the ability of crafts to create substantial employment opportunities presently 
because 
 
 
A. crafts guilds tend to resist new entrants and are unlikely to accept large numbers of trainees. 
 
B. regulatory requirements could make it difficult for small crafts outfits to compete.  
 
C. workers made redundant by automation are unlikely to opt for crafts-related work. 
 
D. the low scale of crafts production will not be able to absorb the mass of redundant labour. 
 
8. 
We can infer from the passage that medieval crafts guilds resembled mass production in that both 
 
 
A. focused excessively on product quality. 
 
B. discouraged innovation by restricting entry through strict rules. 
 
C. did not necessarily promote creativity. 
 
D. did not always employ egalitarian production processes. 
 
9. 
The most recent revival in interest in the crafts is a result of the emergence of all of the following 
EXCEPT: 
 
 
A. support for individual creations as opposed to mass-produced objects. 
 
B. a niche market for discerning buyers of quality products. 
 
C. a greater interest in buying locally produced goods. 
 
D. concerns about the environmental impact of mass production. 
 
10. 
Which one of the following statements is NOT inconsistent with the views stated in the passage? 
 
 
A. Creativity in the crafts could be stifled if the market for artisan goods becomes too organised. 
 
B. The Arts and Crafts movement was initially inspired by the “American system” of production. 
 
C. We need to support the crafts; only then can we retain the creativity intrinsic to their production. 
 
D. The agile movement in software is a throwback to the tenets of the medieval crafts guilds. 
 
DIRECTIONS for the question: The passage given below is followed by four alternate summaries. Choose 
the option that best captures the essence of the passage. 
 
11. 
Scientific research shows that many animals are very intelligent and have sensory and motor abilities 
that dwarf ours. Dogs are able to detect diseases such as cancer and diabetes and warn humans of 
impending heart attacks and strokes. Elephants, whales, hippopotamuses, giraffes, and alligators use 
low-frequency sounds to communicate over long distances, often miles. Many animals also display 
wide-ranging emotions, including joy, happiness, empathy, compassion, grief, and even resentment 
and embarrassment. It’s not surprising that animals share many emotions with us because we also 
share brain structures, located in the limbic system, that are the seat of our emotions. 
 
 
A.  Animals are more intelligent than us in sensing danger and detecting diseases. 
 
B.  The advanced sensory and motor abilities of animals is the reason why they can display wide-
ranging emotions. 
 
C.  The similarity in brain structure explains why animals show emotions typically associated with 
humans. 
 
D.  Animals can show emotions which are typically associated with humans. 
 


===== PAGE 5 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
5 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
DIRECTIONS for questions 12 to 15: The passage below is accompanied by four questions. Based on the 
passage, choose the best answer for each question. 
 
Landing in Australia, the British colonists weren't much impressed with the small-bodied, slender-snooted 
marsupials called bandicoots. “Their muzzle, which is much too long, gives them an air exceedingly stupid,” 
one naturalist noted in 1805. They nicknamed one type the “zebra rat’ because of its black-striped rump. 
 
Silly-looking or not, though, the zebra rat—the smallest bandicoot, more commonly known today as the 
western barred bandicoot—exhibited a genius for survival in the harsh outback, where its ancestors had 
persisted for some 26 million years. Its births were triggered by rainfall in the bone-dry desert. It carried its 
breath-mint-size babies in a backward-facing pouch so mothers could forage for food and dig shallow, 
camouflaged shelters. 
 
Still, these adaptations did not prepare the western barred bandicoot for the colonial-era transformation of its 
ecosystem, particularly the onslaught of imported British animals, from cattle and rabbits that damaged 
delicate desert vegetation to ravenous house cats that soon developed a taste for bandicoots. Several of the 
dozen-odd bandicoot species went extinct, and by the 1940s the western barred bandicoot, whose original 
range stretched across much of the continent, persisted only on two predator-free islands in Shark Bay, off 
Australia’s western coast. 
 
“Our isolated fauna had simply not been exposed to these predators,” says Reece Pedler, an ecologist with the 
Wild Deserts conservation program. 
 
Now Wild Deserts is using descendants of those few thousand island survivors, called Shark Bay bandicoots, 
in a new effort to seed a mainland bandicoot revival. They've imported 20 bandicoots to a preserve on the 
edge of the Strzelecki Desert, in the remote interior of New South Wales. This sanctuary is a challenging 
place, desolate much of the year, with one of the world’s most mercurial rainfall patterns—relentless droughts 
followed by sudden drenching floods. 
 
The imported bandicoots occupy two fenced “exclosures,” cleared of invasive rabbits (courtesy of Pedler’s 
sheepdog) and of feral cats (which slunk off once the rabbits disappeared). A third fenced area contains the 
program’s Wild Training Zone, where two other rare marsupials (bilbies, a larger type of bandicoot, and 
mulgaras, a somewhat fearsome fuzzball known for sucking the brains out of prey) currently share terrain with 
controlled numbers of cats, learning to evade them. It's unclear whether the Shark Bay bandicoots, which are 
perhaps even more predator-naive than their now-extinct mainland bandicoot kin, will be able to make that 
kind of breakthrough. 
 
For now, though, a recent surge of rainfall has led to a bandicoot joey boom, raising the Wild Deserts 
population to about 100, with other sanctuaries adding to that number. There are also signs of rebirth in the 
landscape itself. With their constant digging, the bandicoots trap moisture and allow for seed germination so 
the cattle-damaged desert can restore itself. 
They have a new nickname—a flattering one, this time. “We call them ecosystem engineers,” Pedler says. 
 
12. 
According to the text, the western barred bandicoots now have a flattering name because they have 
 
 
A. led a revival in preserving the species. 
B. led to a surge and increase of rainfall. 
 
C. grown fivefold in terms of population. 
D. aided in altering an arid environment. 
 
13. 
The text uses the word ‘exclosures’ because Wild Deserts has adopted a measure of 
 
 
A. ridding the main desert of feral cats and large bilbies. 
 
B. barring the entry of invasive species. 
 
C. excluding animals to make the islands predator-free. 
 
D. restoring cattle damaged deserts to green landscapes. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
6 
14. 
Which one of the following options does NOT represent the characteristics of the western barred 
bandicoot? 
 
 
A. Shallow diggers having an elongated muzzle 
 
B. Smallest black striped marsupial that uses camouflage and dig 
 
C. Look of a rat but with a baby pouch and a slender snout 
 
D. Long thin nose, black striped back, pouch for joeys 
 
15. 
Which one of the following statements provides a gist of this passage? 
 
 
A.  The negligent attitude of the British colonists towards these bandicoots evidenced by the names 
given to them led to their annihilation. 
 
B.  A type of bandicoots was nearly wiped out by invasive species but rescuers now pin hopes on a 
remnant island population. 
 
C.  Marsupials are going extinct due to the colonial era transformation of the ecosystem which also 
destroyed natural vegetation. 
 
D.  The onslaught of animals, such as cattle, rabbits and housecats, brought in by the British led to the 
extinction of the western barred bandicoot. 
 
DIRECTIONS for questions 16 to 19: The passage below is accompanied by four questions. Based on the 
passage, choose the best answer for each question. 
 
Oftentimes, when economists cross borders, they are less interested in learning from others than in invading 
their garden plots. Gary Becker, for instance, pioneered the idea of human capital. To do so, he famously 
tackled topics like crime and domesticity, applying methods honed in the study of markets to domains of 
nonmarket life. He projected economics outward into new realms: for example, by revealing the extent to 
which humans calculate marginal utilities when choosing their spouses or stealing from neighbors. At the 
same time, he did not let other ways of thinking enter his own economic realm: for example, he did not 
borrow from anthropology or history or let observations of nonmarket economics inform his homo economic 
us. Becker was a picture of the imperial economist in the heyday of the discipline’s bravura. 
 
Times have changed for the once almighty discipline. Economics has been taken to task, within and beyond its 
ramparts. Some economists have reached out, imported, borrowed, and collaborated—been less imperial, 
more open. Consider Thomas Piketty and his outreach to historians. The booming field of behavioral 
economics—the fusion of economics and social psychology—is another case. Having spawned active 
subfields, like judgment, decision-making and a turn to experimentation, the field aims to go beyond the 
caricature of Rational Man to explain how humans make decisions.... 
 
It is important to underscore how this flips the way we think about economics. For generations, economists 
have presumed that people have interests—‘preferences,” in the neoclassical argot—that get revealed in the 
course of peoples’ choices. Interests come before actions and determine them. If you are hungry, you buy 
lunch; if you are cold, you get a sweater. If you only have so much money and can't afford to deal with both 
your growling stomach and your shivering, which need you choose to meet using your scarce savings reveals 
your preference. 
 
Psychologists take one look at this simple formulation and shake their heads. Increasingly, even some 
mainstream economists have to admit that homo economic us doesn’t always behave like the textbook 
maximizer; irrational behavior can’t simply be waved away as extra-economic expressions of passions over 
interests, and thus the domain of other disciplines... .This is one place where the humanist can help the 
economist. If narrative economics is going to help us understand how rivals duke it out, who wins and who 
loses, we are going to need much more than lessons from epidemiological studies of viruses or intracranial 
stimuli. 
 


===== PAGE 7 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
7 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
Above all, we need politics and institutions. Shiller [the Nobel prize winning economist] connects perceptions 
of narratives to changes in behavior and thence to social outcomes. He completes a circle that was key to 
behavioral economics and brings in storytelling to make sense of how perceptions get framed. This cycle 
(perception to behavior to society) was once mediated or dominated by institutions: the political parties, lobby 
groups, and media organizations that played a vital role in legitimating, representing, and excluding interests. 
Yet institutions have been stripped from Shiller's account, to reveal a bare dynamic of emotions and 
economics, without the intermediating place of politics. 
 
16. 
In the first paragraph the author is making the point that economists like Becker 
 
 
A.  had begun to borrow concepts from other disciplines but were averse to the latter applying 
economic principles. 
 
B.  benefitted from the application of their principles and concepts to non-economic phenomena. 
 
C.  used economics to analyse non-market behaviour, without incorporating perspectives from other 
areas of inquiry. 
 
D.  tended to guard their discipline from poaching by academics from other subject areas. 
 
17. 
“Times have changed for the once almighty discipline.” We can infer from this statement and the 
associated paragraph that the author is being 
 
 
A.  sarcastic about how economists, who earlier shunned other disciplines, are now beginning to 
incorporate them in their analyses. 
 
B.  critical of economists’ openly borrowing and collaborating across disciplines to explain how 
humans make decisions. 
 
C.  judgemental about the ability of economic tools to accurately manage crises leading to the 
downfall of this lofty science. 
 
D.  disparaging of economists’ inability to precisely predict market behaviour, and are now 
borrowing from other disciplines to remedy this. 
 
18. 
The author critiques Schiller’s approach to behavioural economics for 
 
 
A.  denigrating the role of institutions while creating a link between behavioural economics and 
perceptions. 
 
B.  linking emotions and rational behaviour without considering the mediation of social institutions. 
 
C.  ignoring the marginal role that media and politics play in influencing people’s behaviour. 
 
D.  relying excessively on storytelling as the main influence on the formation of perceptions. 
 
19. 
We can infer from the passage that the term “homo economic us” refers to someone 
 
 
A.  maximises their opportunities based on nonmarket choices. 
 
B.  makes rational decisions based on their own preferences. 
 
C.  believes in borrowing and collaborating with other disciplines in their work. 
 
D.  is not influenced by the preferences and choices of others. 
 
DIRECTIONS for the question:  Five jumbled up sentences (labelled 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5), related to a topic, are 
given below. Four of them can be put together to form a coherent paragraph. Identify the odd sentence and 
key in the number of that sentence as your answer. 
 
20. 
1.  Animals have an interest in fulfilling their basic needs, but also in avoiding suffering, and thus we 
ought to extend moral consideration. 
 
2.  Singer viewed himself as a utilitarian, and presents a direct moral theory concerning animal 
rights, in contrast to indirect positions, such as welfarist views.  
 
3.  He argued for extending moral consideration to animals because, similar to humans, animals have 
certain significant interests. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
8 
 
4.  The event that publicly announced animal rights as a legitimate issue within contemporary 
philosophy was Peter Singer’s Animal Liberation text in 1975. 
 
5.  As such, we ought to view their interests alongside and equal to human interests, which results in 
humans having direct moral duties towards animals. 
 
 
 
DIRECTIONS for the question:  The passage given below is followed by four alternate summaries. Choose 
the option that best captures the essence of the passage. 
 
21. 
Certain codes may, of course, be so widely distributed in a specific language community or culture, 
and be learned at so early an age, that they appear not to be constructed — the effect of an articulation 
between sign and referent — but to be ‘naturally’ given. Simple visual signs appear to have achieved 
a ‘near-universality’ in this sense: though evidence remains that even apparently ‘natural’ visual codes 
are culture specific. However, this does not mean that no codes have intervened; rather, that the codes 
have been profoundly naturalized. The operation of naturalized codes reveals not the transparency and 
‘naturalness’ of language but the depth, the habituation and the near-universality of the codes in use. 
They produce apparently ‘natural’ recognitions. This has the (ideological) effect of concealing the 
practices of coding which are present. 
 
 
A.  All codes, linguistic and visual, have a natural origin but some are so widespread that they 
become universal. This is what hides the mechanism of coding behind signs. 
 
B.  Learning linguistic and visual signs at an early age makes all such codes appear natural. This 
naturalization of codes is the effect of ideology. 
 
C.  Not all codes are natural but certain codes are naturalized and made to appear universal. Ideology 
aims to hide the mechanism of coding behind signs. 
 
D.  Language and visual signs are codes. However, some of the codes are so widespread that they not 
only seem naturally given but also hide the mechanism of coding behind the signs. 
 
DIRECTIONS for the question:  Five jumbled up sentences (labelled 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5), related to a topic, are 
given below. Four of them can be put together to form a coherent paragraph. Identify the odd sentence and 
key in the number of that sentence as your answer. 
 
22. 
1.  Urbanites also have more and better options for getting around: Uber is ubiquitous; easy-to-rent 
dockless bicycles are spreading; battery-powered scooters will be next. 
 
2.  When more people use buses or trains the service usually improves because public-transport 
agencies run more buses and trains. 
 
3.  Worsening services on public transport, terrorist attacks in some urban metros and a rise in fares 
have been blamed for this trend. 
 
4.  It seems more likely that public transport is being squeezed structurally as people’s need to travel 
is diminishing as a result of smartphones, video-conferencing, online shopping and so on. 
 
5.  There has been a puzzling decline in the use of urban public transport in many countries in the 
west, despite the growth in urban populations and rising employment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 9 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
9 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
DIRECTIONS for questions 23 & 24: There is a sentence that is missing in the paragraph below. Look at 
the paragraph and decide where (option 1, 2, 3, or 4) the following sentence would best fit. 
 
23. 
Sentence: The brain isn’t organized the way you might set up your home office or bathroom medicine 
cabinet. 
 
 
Paragraph: ___(1)___. You can’t just put things anywhere you want to. The evolved architecture of 
the brain is haphazard and disjointed, and incorporates multiple systems, each of which has a mind of 
its own. __(2)__. Evolution doesn’t design things and it doesn’t build systems—it settles on systems 
that, historically, conveyed a survival benefit. There is no overarching, grand planner engineering the 
systems so that they work harmoniously together. __(3)__. The brain is more like a big, old house 
with piecemeal renovations done on every floor, and less like new construction ___4__. 
 
 
A. Option 3 
B. Option 1 
C. Option 2 
D. Option 4 
 
24. 
Sentence: Understanding central Asia’s role helps developments make more sense not only across 
Asia but in Europe, the Americas and Africa. 
 
 
Paragraph: The nations of the Silk Roads are sometimes called ‘developing countries’, but they are 
actually some of the world’s most highly developed countries, the very crossroads of civilization, in 
advanced states of disrepair.__(1)__. These countries lie at the centre of global affairs: they have since 
the beginning of history. Running across the spine of Asia, they form a web of connections fanning 
out in every direction, routes along which pilgrims and warriors, nomads and merchants have 
travelled, goods and produce have been bought and sold, and ideas exchanged, adapted and 
refined.__(2)__— . They have carried not only prosperity, but also death and violence, disease and 
disaster.___(3)__. The Silk Roads are the world’s central nervous system, connecting otherwise far-
flung peoples and places....___(4)__. It allows us to see patterns and links, causes and effects that 
remain invisible if one looks only at Europe, or North America. 
 
 
A. Option 1 
B. Option 4 
C. Option 2 
D. Option 3 
 


===== PAGE 10 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
10 
SECTION: DI & LOGICAL REASONING 
 
DIRECTIONS for questions 25 to 29: Read the information given below and answer the question that 
follows 
 
The game of QUIET is played between two teams. Six teams, numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, play in a QUIET 
tournament. These teams are divided equally into two groups. In the tournament, each team plays every other 
team in the same group only once, and each team in the other group exactly twice. The tournament has several 
rounds, each of which consists of a few games. Every team plays exactly one game in each round. The 
following additional facts are known about the schedule of games in the tournament. 
 
1. Each team played against a team from the other group in Round 8. 
2. In Round 4 and Round 7, the match-ups, that is the pair of teams playing against each other, were identical. 
In Round 5 and Round 8, the match-ups were identical. 
3. Team 4 played Team 6 in both Round 1 and Round 2. 
4. Team 1 played Team 5 ONLY once and that was in Round 2. 
5. Team 3 played Team 4 in Round 3. Team 1 played Team 6 in Round 6. 
6. In Round 8, Team 3 played Team 6, while Team 2 played Team 5. 
 
25. 
How many rounds were there in the tournament? 
 
 
 
26. 
What is the number of the team that played Team 1 in Round 5? 
 
 
 
27. 
Which team among the teams numbered 2, 3, 4, and 5 was not part of the same group? 
 
 
A. 4 
B. 5 
C. 3 
D. 2 
 
28. 
What is the number of the team that played Team 1 in Round 7? 
 
 
 
29. 
What is the number of the team that played Team 6 in Round 3? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 11 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
11 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
DIRECTIONS for questions 30 to 33: Read the information given below and answer the question that 
follows 
 
The chart below provides complete information about the number of countries visited by Dheeraj, Samantha 
and Nitesh, in Asia, Europe and the rest of the world (ROW). 
 
 
 
The following additional facts are known about the countries visited by them. 
 
1. 32 countries were visited by at least one of them. 
2. USA (in ROW) is the only country that was visited by all three of them. 
3. China (in Asia) is the only country that was visited by both Dheeraj and Nitesh, but not by Samantha. 
4. France (in Europe) is the only country outside Asia, which was visited by both Dheeraj and Samantha, but 
not by Nitesh. 
5. Half of the countries visited by both Samantha and Nitesh are in Europe. 
 
30. 
How many countries in Asia were visited by at least one of Dheeraj, Samantha and Nitesh? 
 
 
 
31. 
How many countries in Europe were visited only by Nitesh? 
 
 
 
32. 
How many countries in the ROW were visited by both Nitesh and Samantha? 
 
 
 
33. 
How many countries in Europe were visited by exactly one of Dheeraj, Samantha and Nitesh? 
 
 
A. 5 
B. 10 
C. 12 
D. 14 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 12 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
12 
DIRECTIONS for questions 34 to 37: Read the information given below and answer the question that 
follows 
 
The chart below shows the price data for seven shares– A,B,C,D,E,F, and G as a candlestick plot for a 
particular day. The vertical axis shows the price of the share in rupees. A share whose closing price (price at 
the end of the day) is more than its opening price (price at the start of the day) is called a bullish share; 
otherwise, it is called a bearish share. All bullish and bearish shares are shown in green and red colour 
respectively. 
 
 
 
34. 
Daily Share Price Variability (SPV) is defined as (Day’s high price - Day’s low price) /(Average of 
the opening and closing prices during the day). Which among the shares A, C, D and F had the 
highest SPV on that day? 
 
 
A. A 
B. C 
C. F 
D. D 
 
35. 
Daily Share Price Variability (SPV) is defined as (Day’s high price - Day’s low price) / (Average of 
the opening and closing prices during the day). How many shares had an SPV greater than 0.5 on that 
day? 
 
 
 
36. 
Daily loss for a share is defined as (Opening price — Closing price) / (Opening price). Which among 
the shares A, B, F and G had the highest daily loss on that day? 
 
 
A. G 
B. F 
C. A 
D. B 
 
37. 
What would have been the percentage wealth gain for a trader, who bought equal numbers of all 
bullish shares at opening price and sold them at their day’s high? 
 
 
A. 50% 
B. 100% 
C. 72% 
D. 80% 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 13 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
13 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
DIRECTIONS for questions 38 to 41: Read the information given below and answer the question that 
follows 
 
Six web surfers M, N, O, P, X, and Y each had 30 stars which they distributed among four bloggers A, B, C, 
and D. The number of stars received by A and B from the six web surfers is shown in the figure below. 
 
 
 
The following additional facts are known regarding the number of stars received by the bloggers from the 
surfers. 
 
1. The numbers of stars received by the bloggers from the surfers were all multiples of 5 (including Q). 
2. The total numbers of stars received by the bloggers were the same. 
3. Each blogger received a different number of stars from M. 
4. Two surfers gave all their stars to a single blogger. 
5. D received more stars than C from Y. 
 
38. 
What was the total number of stars received by D? 
 
 
 
39. 
What was the number of stars received by D from Y? 
 
 
A. 10 
B. 0 
C. 5 
D. cannot be determined 
 
40. 
How many surfers distributed their stars among exactly 2 bloggers? 
 
 
 
41. 
Which of the following can be determined with certainty? 
 
 
I. The number of stars received by C from M 
 
II. The number of stars received by D from O 
 
 
A. Neither I nor II 
B. Both I and II 
C. Only I 
D. Only II 


===== PAGE 14 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
14 
DIRECTIONS for questions 42 to 46: Read the information given below and answer the question that 
follows 
 
Two students, Amiya and Ramya are the only candidates in an election for the position of class representative. 
Students will vote based on the intensity level of Amiya’s and Ramya’s campaigns and the type of campaigns 
they run. Each campaign is said to have a level of 1 if it is a staid campaign and a level of 2 if it is a vigorous 
campaign. Campaigns can be of two types, they can either focus on issues, or on attacking the other candidate. 
 
If Amiya and Ramya both run campaigns focusing on issues, then 
 
 
The percentage of students voting in the election will be 20 times the sum of the levels of 
campaigning of the two students. For example, if Amiya and Ramya both run vigorous campaigns, 
then 20 x (2+2)%, that is, 80% of the students will vote in the election. 
 
Among voting students, the percentage of votes for each candidate will be proportional to the levels of 
their campaigns. For example, if Amiya runs a staid (i.e., level 1) campaign while Ramya runs a 
vigorous (i.e., level 2) campaign, then Amiya will receive 1/3 of the votes cast, and Ramya will 
receive the other 2/3. 
 
The above-mentioned percentages change as follows if at least one of them runs a campaign attacking their 
opponent. 
 
 
If Amiya runs a campaign attacking Ramya and Ramya runs a campaign focusing on issues, then 10% 
of the students who would have otherwise voted for Amiya will vote for Ramya, and another 10% 
who would have otherwise voted for Amiya, will not vote at all. 
 
If Ramya runs a campaign attacking Amiya and Amiya runs a campaign focusing on issues, then 20% 
of the students who would have otherwise voted for Ramya will vote for Amiya, and another 5% who 
would have otherwise voted for Ramya, will not vote at all. 
 
If both run campaigns attacking each other, then 10% of the students who would have otherwise voted 
for them had they run campaigns focusing on issues, will not vote at all. 
 
42. 
If both of them run staid campaigns attacking the other, then what percentage of students will vote in 
the election? 
 
 
A. 60% 
B. 64% 
C. 40% 
D. 36% 
 
43. 
What is the minimum percentage of students who will vote in the election? 
 
 
A. 32% 
B. 40% 
C. 36% 
D. 38% 
 
44. 
If Amiya runs a campaign focusing on issues, then what is the maximum percentage of votes that she 
can get? 
 
 
A. 40% 
B. 36% 
C. 48% 
D. 44% 
 
45. 
If Ramya runs a campaign attacking Amiya, then what is the minimum percentage of votes that she is 
guaranteed to get? 
 
 
A. 30% 
B. 15% 
C. 12% 
D. 18% 
 
46. 
What is the maximum possible voting margin with which one of the candidates can win? 
 
 
A. 20% 
B. 29% 
C. 26% 
D. 28% 


===== PAGE 15 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
15 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
SECTION: QUANTITATIVE ABILITY 
 
47. 
When 10100 is divided by 7, the remainder is 
 
 
A. 6 
B. 1 
C. 4 
D. 3 
 
48. 
Two places A and B are 45 kms apart and connected by a straight road. Anil goes from A to B while 
Sunil goes from B to A. Starting at the same time, they cross each other in exactly 1 hour 30 minutes. 
If Anil reaches B exactly 1 hour 15 minutes after Sunil reaches A, the speed of Anil, in km per hour, 
is 
 
 
A. 14 
B. 12 
C. 16 
D. 18 
 
49. 
There are four numbers such that average of first two numbers is 1 more than the first number, 
average of first three numbers is 2 more than average of first two numbers, and average of first four 
numbers is 3 more than average of first three numbers. Then, the difference between the largest and 
the smallest numbers, is 
 
 
 
50. 
The sum of all four-digit numbers that can be formed with the distinct non-zero digits a, b, c, and d, 
with each digit appearing exactly once in every number, is 153310 + n, where n is a single digit 
natural number. Then, the value of (a + b + c + d + n) is 
 
 
 
51. 
In September, the incomes of Kamal, Amal and Vimal are in the ratio 8 : 6 : 5. They rent a house 
together, and Kamal pays 15%, Amal pays 12% and Vimal pays 18% of their respective incomes to 
cover the total house rent in that month. In October, the house rent remains unchanged while their 
incomes increase by 10%, 12% and 15%, respectively. In October, the percentage of their total 
income that will be paid as house rent, is nearest to 
 
 
A. 13.26 
B. 14.84 
C. 12.75 
D. 15.18 
 
52. 
An amount of Rs 10000 is deposited in bank A for a certain number of years at a simple interest of 
5% per annum. On maturity, the total amount received is deposited in bank B for another 5 years at a 
simple interest of 6% per annum. If the interests received from bank A and bank B are in the ratio 10 : 
13, then the investment period, in years, in bank A is 
 
 
A. 4 
B. 6 
C. 3 
D. 5 
 
53. 
If the equations x2 + mx + 9 = 0, x2 + nx + 17 = 0 and x2 + (m + n) x + 35 = 0 have a common 
negative root, then the value of (2m + 3m) is 
 
 
 
54. 
If x is a positive real number such that 4 log10 x + 4 log100 x + 8 log 1000 x = 13, t hen greatest integer 
not exceeding x, is 
 
 


===== PAGE 16 =====
 
 
 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
 
 
16 
55. 
Let x, y, and z be real numbers satisfying 
 
4(x2 + y2 + z2) = a  
 
4(x – y – z) = 3 + a  
 
Then a equals  
 
 
A. 3
1
1
 
B. 3 
C. 1 
D. 4 
 
56. 
In the XY-plane, the area, in sq. units, of the region defined by the inequalities  
 
y  x + 4 and – 4 ≤ x2 + y2 +_ 5 (x – y) ≤ 0 is  
 
 
A. 3 
B. 2 
C.  
D. 4 
 
57. 
A glass is filled with milk. Two-thirds of its content is poured out and replaced with water. If this 
process of pouring out two-thirds the content and replacing with water is repeated three more times, 
then the final ratio of milk to water in the glass, is 
 
 
A. 1 : 26 
B. 1 : 80 
C. 1 : 27 
D. 1 : 81 
 
58. 
Consider two sets A = {2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13} and B = {1, 8, 27}. Let f be a function from A to B such 
that for every element D in B, there is at least one element a in A such that f(a) = b. Then, the total 
number of such functions f is 
 
 
A. 667 
B. 540 
C. 537 
D. 665 
 
59. 
The surface area of a closed rectangular box, which is inscribed in a sphere, is 846 sq cm, and the sum 
of the lengths of all its edges is 144 cm. The volume, in cubic cm, of the sphere is 
 
 
A. 1125
2 
B. 750
2 
C. 1125 
D. 750 
 
60. 
The selling price of a product is fixed to ensure 40% profit. If the product had cost 40% less and had 
been sold for 5 rupees less, then the resulting profit would have been 50%. The original selling price, 
in rupees, of the product is 
 
 
A. 10 
B.15 
C. 20 
D. 14 
 
61. 
A shop wants to sell a certain quantity (in kg) of grains. It sells half the quantity and an additional 3 
kg of these grains to the first customer. Then, it sells half of the remaining quantity and an additional 
3 kg of these grains to the second customer. Finally, when the shop sells half of the remaining 
quantity and an additional 3 kg of these grains to the third customer, there are no grains left. The 
initial quantity, in kg, of grains is 
 
 
A. 42 
B. 18 
C. 36 
D. 50 
 
62. 
If (a + b
n ) is the positive square root of (29 – 12
5 ), where a and b are integers, and n is a natural 
number, then the maximum possible value of (a + b + n) is 
 
 
A. 4 
B.18 
C. 6 
D. 22 
 
63. 
ABCD is a rectangle with sides AB = 56 cm and BC = 45 cm, and E is the midpoint of side CD. Then, 
the length, in cm, of radius of in circle of ADE is 
 
 


===== PAGE 17 =====
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
17 
Actual CAT 2024 
Slot - I 
64. 
A fruit seller has a total of 187 fruits consisting of apples, mangoes and oranges. The number of 
apples and mangoes are in the ratio 5 : 2. After she sells 75 apples, 26 mangoes and half of the 
oranges, the ratio of number of unsold apples to number of unsold oranges becomes 3: 2. The total 
number of unsold fruits is 
 
 
 
65. 
The sum of all real values of k for which 
k
1
3
1
k
32768
1
8
1
32768
1
8
1





















, is 
 
 
A. 
3
4

 
B. 
3
2

 
C. 
3
4 
D. 
3
2 
 
66. 
Suppose x1, x2, x3,….. x100 are in arithmetic progression such that x5 = –4 and 2x6, 2x9 = x11 + x13. 
Then, x100 equals.  
 
 
A. 204 
B. -194 
C. 206 
D. -196 
 
67. 
Renu would take 15 days working 4 hours per day to complete a certain task whereas Seema would 
take 8 days working 5 hours per day to complete the same task. They decide to work together to 
complete this task. Seema agrees to work for double the number of hours per day as Renu, while Renu 
agrees to work for double the number of days as Seema. If Renu works 2 hours per day, then the 
number of days Seema will work, is 
 
 
 
68. 
For any natural number n, let an be the largest integer not exceeding
n .  
 
Then the value of a1 + a2 + ….+a50 is  
 
 
 


